## GUI Example

To write a gui framework in std rei:

```rust
Component: {
    // draw your stuff as vectors
    render: trait () -> RenderSpec
}

Box: extend Component {
    render: impl () -> RenderSpec {
        // call child renderspecs and expand your box to fit them via a simple box algorithm
        let children_spec = self.children.map(c => c.render())
        let height, width = box(children_spec)

        RenderSpec(height, width, bg_color)
    }
}

draw: (root: Component) {
    let render_spec = root.render()
    // rasterise and stuff...
}
```

Powerful thing about functional programming => ability to store state and action mappings via closures and pass that into another context. Then use that closure to change that context, e.g. in a render loop. With affine types/ownership we have zero cost mapping. No copying, we literally just pass the entire thing, e.g. via an offset.

## Example Code Snippets

```rust
1 + 1 * 3

1 * *3 + 1
// 1 parsed as numeric
// 1 * rhs parsed as binary op

*3 + 1
// *3 parsed as unary prefix
// + 1

* 3 + 1

// could either mean deref <expr>
// or mult <expr>

f: (x: Int)
// the following two are equivalent. If you have Int() and = at once, that is an error
// or maybe just x: Int = Int(5)
// depends on style guide and styler
f: (x: Int(5))
f: (x: Int = 5)
f: (x: Int < 5)
f: (x: Int < 5, < 10, = 10)

f: (x: Int < 5, < 10, y: String = "f")
f: (x: Int lessthan(5), y: String)

// normal generic
T[T1, T2]: {
    a: T1
}

// depends on the value of T1, rather than just T1
// functions that take in T with v now are able to differentiate between different variants of T
T[v T1]: {
    a: T1
}

T: impl Plus (v self, v Self) -> Self => ...

f: (t1: v T, t2: v T) {
    t1 + t2
}

// what replace actually is

x: replace () => ()

// virtual impl I guess
replace: impl Index(i: Int) => .. invoke macro

// associativity...
// everything is left associative
// BODMAS

Box {
    bg_color=Blue

    Box
    HBox
    Flex
    Text
}

// using dependent type parameter as the default
V[v: x::V]: {
    v1: Int(v)
}

// where is it useful? well when you can write functions specifically taking in the dependent type parameters into account
k: (arg[v: V == 0]) {}

index: trait (i: _) -> ()

// static refinement
array: impl index(i >= 0) -> () {}

Array[T, N]: [T; N]

Array[T, N]: impl Index(i < N)
```

Everything in rei can be seen as an n-order abstraction of code and data.
For example, a parameterized context can be seen as its max nested element + 1.

In order for these abstractions to be useful in terms of actually executing and evaluating to more data and code, they have to be linearized first.

```rust
// responsible for labeling
Query: {
    "mod1_mod2_name" : &Node
}

// responsible for data and relationships between instructions & data
Node: [
    Instruction [call neighbor1, add 2 + d1u8]
    Y [u8, Z [ 100 ]]
]
```

Example queries, e.g. from a main() program or a REPL.

```rust
Instruction [ call "mod1_mod2_name" ]

// on a REPL or evaluation/scripting environment, all expressions are "returned" and "displayed"
// many call ops affect the SP. On a scripting env, there is a pseudo stack that is kinda like a full executor stack
Instruction [ call "mod1_mod2_name" ]
Instruction [ display sp ]
```

What happens when you call 1 + 1.

```rust
Instruction [ StackOverwrite binary_add 1 1 ] => val
Display val
```

## Phantasm RISC Usage

Phantasm RISC is quite different to Phantasm SM. You have direct register-register and register-memory operations.

Example:

```rust
// note symbols will be mangled if possible. Good to prevent any possible mix ups
// something like a sha 256 randomisation scheme
@code

_init:
    // any global vars are always initialised (constexpr if possible)
    call A_A_constructor
    x = ret0

func:
    t0 = a0
    t1 = a1
    call arg0
    return

A_A_constructor:
    sp = sp - 8
    x0 = A.data
    return

@data
x: A

A: ...
```

## Overview

Rei is a general purpose programming language that flows across spacetime, with a maximal focus on static analysis. What should result is a mixture of performance, elegance and productivity (also through ergonomics, see `rein`). A feeling that the language just works once you've set everything up.

Rei can be seen as a minimal language and api which allows you to build complex abstractions on top of. Rei is meant to accustom super low level programming and systems programming in a direct manner. It takes inspiration from rust, lisp, typescript and the ascended theory of computation.

## Types

Bitfields. In the realm of the ascended theory of computation, we take the lowest, most atomic form of data to be a single bit. When combined and permutated, form more complex data. We then interpret those permutations of discrete bits to form the reasoning and logic of our program and complex data types. Furthermore if we consider how the data is transferred, e.g. streamed or bulk transferred, the logic we use could be significantly different. There are also additional topics such as padding, alignment, etc. which may be required for the underlying system's implementatin, e.g. SSD's are partitioned into 512B-4K pages.

In the rei base language spec, the root type is `Bits`. That is, 0-INF permutations of bits. This can is represented through an array of booleans with index `0` as the first bit and index `size - 1` as the last bit.

## Functional

Rei can be seen as a functional-first language. It is meant to be general purpose, and does have object-oriented capabilities, but many of its concepts borrow from functional programming literature.

Coming from an OOP background, one may be familiar with classes, methods, inheritance, vtables, and all the design patterns associated with it such as factories, builders, visitors, etc.

With rei-style functional programming, one should instead think in terms of enumerated objects, pattern matching, effect purity, closures, generics and monomorphism, function composition and functional macros. Also, rei exposes an ergonomic interface to declare objects in an OO-style while maintaining the underlying, driving functional paradigm. E.g. the `extend` keyword helps to modularise and simulate the feel of inheritance, while all your doing is creating another variant of the base enum.

Functional programming is generally much more concise since everything is treated as a function. Rei encourages one to write callable contexts (a more generalised version of a function or control block with its own context). The `core` library encourages use of function composition and chaining, higher order functions, generic functions, wrappers and aggregations with map-based operations like `map`, `filter`, `reduce`, `match` to map over them or pattern match.

## Blocks

The most abstract concept of computation is an instruction. A more helpful concept is that of a block of instructions. A sequence of instructions carried from start to finish. Blocks come in many different types: normal blocks, enumerated blocks, extension blocks, parameterised blocks, macro blocks, module blocks.

A block may be an anonymous (unlabelled) block. Anonymous blocks are basically blocks with their own local namespace that inherits the scope rules from its parent block. E.g. an anonymous block placed somewhere in a function would just be its own local namespace + the function's namespace and executed in the function's context. An anonymous block somewhere in an object's body would be similar. It would be basically an extension of the object within the object itself, like a local namespace for functions you dont want other functions in the object to know of. An anonymous block somewhere in a module block is again similar, though they cannot be exported. Anon blocks inside objects and modules are not recommended and are usually just going to be optimised out since you cant target them directly, unless you are assigning a variable to them (but that cant be done inside module blocks and object blocks anyway).

## Prei

`Project tool for Rei` is a universal utility and framework for writing somewhat standard rei applications. It enforces a certain project structure, with `src, examples, docs, tests, etc`. Your main source files are structured similar to cargo, with implicit file-modules and directory-submodules for managing complex themes.

What prei also does is allow stronger integration with `rein` and its language analysis features. Most features found in LSPs nowadays are supported by using prei as an intermediary. What prei does is cache queries and store a single, global data structure to allow fast incremental compilation. The underlying engine it uses is rei's base language library which implements the lexing, parsing and codegen functions among other features defined in the base rei spec. You can think of `prei` like cargo, but with a more powerful interface and extra responsibilites for creating and building entire projects in an efficient manner.

## Demand Driven Compilation

Rei's base implementation is structured as a demand-driven model. It exposes a set of API functions that usually do independent tasks and can potentially allow better parallelisation through a manager like prei.

The base implementation is meant to be a minimal, self standing set of APIs to allow the programmer to build pretty much whatever they want. Most compilers would implement features like modules, traits, etc directly in the compiler itself. But rei takes a different approach. There is no global symbol table per se, but rather a symbol table API which you can use to manage modules (which is also partially know by prei). There is no cache, no builtin pipelines, etc. Rei is not supposed to be a complex system that maximises throughput but rather a general purpose processor that uses queues and atomic operations to process instructions. There is hardly any state (if there even is any).

A good way to look at the base spec is to think of it as a bunch of independent pure functions. Many of the things they do involve parsing code into nodes and subtrees which you can then either use straight away in e.g. prei or call another function on it like lowering it further. In this regard, it is possible to form a fully fledged environment around rei and its utilities and libraries.

## Features

An semi complete feature list of rei (including core and std libraries):

- pointers
  - references, basically safe auto pointers
    - parameterisation or pass by reference
    - immutable and explicit mutable references. Only one immutable reference at one time with no other references during mutable borrow
- operators
  - strict, defined order for simplicity and intuitiveness
  - operator overloading
  - bitwise ops
  - arithmetic math ops, BODMAS
- function calls
  - method calls
- pattern matching
  - enums
  - if else expr
  - ternary
    - elvis
- loop expr
  - for range or val in array/tuple
  - while bool expr
- arrow expressions
- strong typing
  - all types are first class citizens and treated similarly
  - overloading in the same scope, requires different signatures (mostly params)
  - universal definitions of types
    - generics
    - unsafe
      - by default, all types are safe in that they have no side effects
      - unsafe allows side effects and use of outer scoped mutable variables defined at module level
    - objects
      - key-val data
      - tagged union enums
      - inline subtyping with enum fields
      - object promotion and automatic base typing/sub enumming
      - methods, basically sugar so you dont have to type the whole thing
    - callables
      - functions
      - macros, hygenic and "builtin" with reic::macro_api auto linked. No quotes
        - annotations and global once type expr
      - tuples
    - shared functionality on types
      - traits and impls
  - primitive types
    - numeric of arbitrary precision based on specification
    - strings of character like types
      - interpolation with "{}"
    - arrays of a single type
- contracts
  - propagation, "comparison memory"
  - where clauses for types and generics
    - dependent types from contracts
      - arrays of static size
- algebraic effects
  - async/await, a pattern for concurrency (esp IO) and parallelism
  - yield and resume
- anonymous functions, type inference
- const, immutable and mutable variables, type inference based on literals and rhs
  - shadowing
  - mutation of value directly in memory location only possible with mut
- static and lazy variables
  - lazy and once initialised variables in a local scope, similar to consteval but at first use, after which the code is modified to use that directly. Usually dynamically allocated
- namespaced identifiers
  - use `<namespace ident>` semantics for importing
  - export `<universal def>` for exporting
    - default exports
    - exports to specific modules like pkg, prelude, super
- iterators
  - map, reduce, anonymous methods
  - parallel iterators with `.iter_parallel()`
- affine types
  - used only once
  - ownership, only one function may own a variable at once
  - release build basically uses linear types, all unused vars are eliminated
- result types
  - declared with `Result[T, E]`
  - optional types declared with T?
    - optional error types without an Ok value declared with T!
  - result propagation with `?` and `!`

## Defining Types

In rei, the only compiler defined types are primitives: Numerics, Bytes, Arrays, Bools. Complexes include objects and enums. Callables contain functions and tuples. Out of these types, bytes are usually not parsed directly but rather strings (pretty much all strings are just an arbitrary concatentation of bytes). They are a nice way to do conversion in the base compiler.

Traits, impls, etc. build ontop of these primitives. Macros and annotations build ontop of functions.

Rei core also builds on these types to result in core::types::primitive::i32,u32,u64,u128... etc. Byte strings with b"". Regex with core::regex r"". Raw strings with core::raw raw"". F (formatted) strings with the default "". With f strings, you can also use $ instead of {}. Character strings are one-length strings delimited by single quotes ''.

### Aliases

Aliases are like rust aliases where `A: B` sets `A` to `B`.

### Constants

Constants are everywhere, such as pi, euler's number, 4K, etc. Constants can be defined in most scopes like modules, objects, function scopes. Constants defined in the module scope may be exported and visible to all other scopes that way. But constants defined in local scopes may not be exported.

### Exporting

Only module level definitions (universal and constant) may be exported. Although its prob better to use Object-default val to define a global constant. When you `export <item>` you allow that item to be imported from its fully qualified path. When you do `export(...) item` you allow that item to be imported from the listed namespaces such as `pkg, prelude, super`.

By default the lang server autofills using fully qualified paths.

### Objects: Data, Enum and Complexes

Objects are the main structure for composing and modelling data. Object scopes are special scopes where you have key: val fields and associated functions. Functions starting with `self` are simply sugar for methods. Note methods are simply any other associated function and belong to the current module namespace.

### Tuples

Tuples are a special type. Unlike objects, they do not have a key: value mapping but rather rely on array like indexing. Tuples are a special function type that basically returns itself when called.

## Everything is an Expression

Rei is composed of a list of organised expressions. Self contained expressions and evaluation expressions.

Everything is an expression. An expression evaluates to a value. Expressions that arent assigned to a variable or returned by the end of a scope are simply abandoned.

Rei can be most thought of as a multipurpose, data-driven, functional, systems programming language, with an emphasis on static analysis and ergonomics in a human centered environment. Rei tries to maximise agency and with rapid prototyping. Write now, optimise later. Though the compiler is very "strict" in another sense like rustc, dealing with nulls and borrowing rules, and the language itself forces one to at least write sensible or good-ish code or else go out of their way to write potentially bad code.

An example:

```rust
get_data: () -> UInt {
    // expression evaluates to (), since mut var definition expr
    mut x = 1

    // expression evaluates to (), since scoped if expr
    for i in 0..10 {
        // expression evaluates to (), since ident ~ operator
        x++
    }

    // expression evaluates to x (identifier)
    // IDE parse warning: ditched non-trivial expr return
    x

    // expression evaluates to x (identifier)
    x
}
```

## Static Guarentees

Unlike rust, we have automatic lifetime deductions though you are free to add lifetimes `'a` as you wish for clarity. As if it was a comment. Sometimes they may be needed to solve certain cases?

Being a highly compile time based language like Rust, we do a little static analysis. With LSP integration to highlight common tokenisation & parsing errors as well as `reic --check` errors. Runtime errors can be minimised as long as the programmer knows his intent.

Full polymorphism and inheritance is also supported, with unsafe bodies for extra control.

## Reidoc

You use hash `#` comments at certain locations, e.g. the beginning of a file, right before a function expr, and other non trivial or exported blocks. Variable definitions can have a hash comment if exported.

## Compiler Process

Rei follows a similar pattern to rust's compilation process. First, prei converts all source files to modules and all modules to a hierarchy of namespaces ending with the root `pkg` namespace. It does this in parallel for each source file, and parses each file in parallel. The resulting AST is combined together and sent to the analyser.

The analyser does a few things. First, note that a few artifacts were generated: the AST and Symbol Table. The symtab provides a unique identifier enforcement for each namespace and a cache for nodes of the AST given a namespace, identifier and rei type. The analyser first descends the AST, converting certain expressions to values (constexpr) and overall trying to reduce expressions to constants. Its main job however, is to "lower" the AST into a more generic form of instruction flow that can be more readily converted into assembly.

### Lowering

The lowering process involves:

- converting all "sugared" expression nodes into the same form in MIR. E.g. all ternary, if-else, match, elvis statements are converted to the same universal hashed branch block for PIR or jump table or branch statements (depends on size) in cranelift
- converting all local definitions aka variable definitions into stack slots in cranelift or recursive definitions in PIR
- converting all boxed values or external memory definitions into syscalls on unix or just API fns. Note boxed values are just pointers, basically u64 values. In cranelift, I think there are ways to point to external addresses. In PIR its even simpler

### Macro Expansion

Macros can be seen as compiler plugins that are treated as meta programs. Macros are parsed in the usual style just like any other function. But unlike regular functions, they are always "constexpr". So during descent pass 1, each macro invocation is evaluated lazily. A macro fn itself may also be reduced like any other expr. Its like reflection. When you first bump into the macro invocation, you go to that macro in the symtab and use that fn to evaluate the inputs. But unlike usual params, the params directly target the compiler's types like Expr.

E.g.

```rust
x: replace {
    (x: Ident y: Expr) {}

    (x: Ident "," y: Expr) {}
}
```

`reish` is pretty much rei's scripting language. You can embed it in your code, or use it as a library. `reish` is good for many things like shell commands. Unlike bash where there is no versioning, we have a syntax include versioning in `reish` files:

```bash
@!reis v1.1

echo "Hello World!"
```

`reish` includes bash like features as namespaced functions (overloadable) to do stuff like `cd`, `ls`, `curl`, and many other GNU/Unix commands.

```rust
@!reish v2.2

// defined in rei::reis
echo: macro {
    (x: Expr) => {
        // call function to output to
        // stdout or fd

        // write is a core function for fd
        write_volatile(fd, $x)
    }
}

// in /sys/scripts
use fs
use env

// overload 1
ls: () -> Opcode {
    let dir = fs::get_cwd()
    echo "$dir"

    OP_SUCCESS
}

// overload 2
ls: (args: String...) -> Opcode {
    // reis treats repeated args on a case by case basis, though --args and -args should only be singular
    for arg in args {
        if arg.contains("-") {
            // take all the flags

            continue
        }
        if arg.contains("--") {
            // take the = val if there is any
            // or just the arg itself

            continue
        }
        match arg {
            "l"
        }
        
        // otherwise, arg not recognised and exit with ARG_NOT_RECOGNISED
        exit(FAIL, ARG_NOT_RECOGNISED)        
    }

    OP_SUCCESS
}

// if compiling with neutron, can simply include its API as a module instead of using syscalls or primitives like write
pwd: () -> Opcode {
    // call primitive rei function
    let res = service::pwd()
    echo "res"

    OP_SUCCESS
}
```
